i received a well-intentioned series of
questions from a long-time
viewer of the channel asking me to
comment on the relationship
between gdp growth
and revolution this is someone
writing in with the assumption that
revolutions
in our western european tradition and
then the traditions that have devolved
from european colonialism in you know
former provinces of european empires
like
the united states canada australia and
so on around the world
that our tradition of revolutions
has a cause-and-effect relationship with
poverty
when the french revolution happened in
paris
was paris france was that the poorest
part
of europe the people who participated
in the french revolution in in paris
were they poor
by french standards by european
standards by global standards
can you think of examples of countries
and cultures
within europe or all around the world
where people were poorer
sometimes much much poorer but where
they had
stable economic and political regimes
during that same century let's say
were people in france
poorer than people in the ottoman
empire at the same time
were people in france more or less
oppressed
than people in the ottoman empire this
is not the most extreme example
i could offer i tried to reply to this
guy briefly
saying look i have talked about this on
a live stream recently
but what a lot of people are struggling
with are
very fundamentally profoundly stupid
misconceptions about history and
economics
and revolutions that were created by
marxism
and the shame of it is that most of
these people don't think of themselves
as marxists they don't think of
themselves as ex-marxists they don't
think themselves as even
educated in marxism but their
assumptions on a really deep level about
economics and the progress of history
are a kind of bad marxist
stereotype all right uh none of our
revolutions in this sense western europe
and its
its colonies none of them have a cause
and effect
relationship to poverty you could make
the opposite argument that they're
caused by
privilege a real sincere history of
ideas
of the origins of the french revolution
would in my opinion begin
in 1347
with the revolution in rome 1347. now
why started that
that early because really the ideology
of revolution that we have
is profoundly tied to the idea
of a renaissance this is renaissance
with a capital letter r in the european
tradition which is very hard
for people in japan to relate to or
people in china this is really a
uniquely
western european you know cultural
political economic tradition
right um
and then that concept of renaissance of
course is
rooted in classicism in classical
moral political philosophical values
and not all classicism is
overtly pro-democracy or democratic
plenty of it is elitist and imperialist
plenty of it just aspires to recreate
the greatness
of the roman empire and the leadership
of
figures like julius caesar or what have
you thought of uncritically
without any emphasis on the the
democratic element of that classical
heritage
and some schools of thought within that
renaissance
tradition that way of things some are
emphasizing a return to
democracy or some elements of democracy
that they
that they idealize okay so in 1347
in my opinion we have the first major
revolution that really demonstrates this
pattern
and that revolution 1347
what actually happened was much less
important
than what famous authors wrote about it
it was romanticized it was glamorized it
was propagandized
poems were written about this event
i am completely willing to believe that
the real world historical experience of
people who were alive in rome
at that time the people would be able to
say look this was just another crazy
coup d'etat
this was just another pretender to the
throne this was just another grubby
example of one group of people with some
money and weapons trying to take over
the government
such as happened throughout the dark
ages this was no no different no better
no worse
but even if that were true or even that
were largely true
a literature grew up around this
particular coup d'etat
that made it into a revolution in this
sense
in the same sense as the french
revolution in the same sense that we
continue to idealize
revolution now in the 21st century in
the year
2020. all right i would say the next big
example of this would be corsica
again it's not really it's not really
the events of the corsican revolution
it's not
really the reality of the short-lived um
dictatorship of pasquale paulie that's
not really what happened it was what
famous authors said about
what happened um in this case especially
a guy named
boswell boswell whose name is now
indelibly linked with
uh johnson uh boswell wrote an account
of the
corsican revolution and he was not the
last he began the romanticization of or
the creation of
propaganda around this and again this
was this
tremendously influential i mean again
it's not it's not that the events were
influential
it's that the literature that surrounded
the events became uh
influential and um to give an example of
an author you may have heard of
jean-jacques rousseau
was very much influenced by this okay
now the next big
hurdle is the english revolution and
when i say the english revolution i mean
the same events that are often referred
to as the english civil war whatever you
want to call it
right um which people have more
difficulty romanticizing or attributing
uh classical greek and roman values to
but nevertheless
and then it's just about a little bit
more than a century after the english
revolution
we have the french revolution these are
the big these are the big precedents in
sequence and there are
there are smaller uh presence here but
what do they
what do they have in common right i
think on the on the deepest level
you can say that the dark ages were
defined
by regarding antiquity with all
regarding what the ancients accomplished
as something impossible for people to
accomplish today
um still today in the south of france
you live surrounded by the ruins of
the ancient roman empire and it was true
throughout a large part of it we were in
we were in central germany
and it wasn't like the southernmost edge
of germany or something it was
remarkable
you know just how much of tangible
legacy
of the roman empire they were pretending
depending on where you were within
europe whether it was spain or italy
or what have you um the roman imperial
past remained tangible and visible of
course if you were further east it would
have been
the legacy of ancient greece and the
so-called eastern roman empire byzantine
empire
what do you want to call it um this
sense that
not merely architecturally but
in every way um for example their
knowledge of world geography
that they had traveled to and explored
places
that people today could never possibly
go to and explore or write a description
of
it was impossible to compete with the
ancients
in virtue the renaissance mentality is
the opposite say no
we can do this we can do this again we
can even do better
and you know this is included in this is
the process of architectural sketches
and paintings
showing look it would be possible to
make another
great coliseum like the colosseum of
engineering we could make them in every
city in europe even like this is
attainable
it's not the case that they were
physically or mentally superior to us in
ancient times
we can reorganize our society change our
way of thinking improve our quality of
education everyone think about it
we can have a kind of revolution we can
have a kind of renaissance
and we can escape from the dark ages
however those are are conceptualized now
um
it's very important to note the first
written use
of this concept of the dark ages
and of europe emerging from the dark
ages to return to the glory of ancient
times
of classical antiquity ancient greece
and realms ideals
that was precisely in the the revolution
of
1347 right so
these things that it was a very
politically real
context for these seemingly nebulous
impalable ideals to be
to be demonstrated and again at least on
paper
at this time people learned about the
news not through radio and not through
television they read about it as it was
written about
there was this exciting prospect that at
least um
the language of ancient democracy that
again societies would be led by people
called
tribune and consul that it's some of
those democratic ideas
uh you know have forgotten from the
history books
that those could matter again in rome in
the same city of rome of the same
architecture and yeah it did include the
idea of just
physically building bridges and roads
and buildings
and building an empire all right now
um one of the things i notice in 21st
century in our kind of
post-marxist period is that a lot of
people will try to
diminish and dismiss the significance
of renaissance thinking and of
revolutionary thinking
by pointing out the extent to which
this sort of progress in europe is
ineluctably linked to the rise of
european imperialism
european conquest of north america south
america
bits and pieces of asia you know
eventually all of india or most of india
and so on
but the extension of european power
around the world not just through trade
but through the slave trade through
piecemeal
conquest genocide so on and so forth and
there's this sense
that the so-called
progress toward freedom and democracy in
europe
should be seen in the shadow of the rise
of this
terrible global slave trading empire
these terrible genocidal armies
marching out around the world um
that is half true okay
the half of history it's ignoring is
precisely the strength of the ottoman
empire
deep deep into the period that we call
the renaissance the ottoman empire is
still expanding
and in reality europe as we know it
is shrinking less and less of the
mediterranean
is under the control of european powers
more and more of it is under
the control of the ottoman empire the
ottoman empire grows and grows and grows
until it crumbles right so
you're only looking at one half
of the equation if you're looking at the
fact that you mean on a map
all of a sudden a huge amount of
territory for example in canada
canada and the united states is taken
over by european powers the french and
the english
huge amount of territory taken by the
spanish and the portuguese in south
america then again
the map is a little more complex when
you're including the colonization of
asia but
huge huge you know what else you know
what else is huge
greece during those same
centuries decade by decade look at a
color-coded map
of how much of greece is controlled and
conquered by
the ottoman empire and when and how just
barely
greece manages to retain it manages to
regain
its liberty or its its independence
right like you really think greece
is a small or trivial place compared to
quebec you know really you know when you
really think about it and during these
centuries
you know what really matters um and
during these centuries
large large parts of christendom large
parts of christian europe
continue to be at war uh with the
ottoman empire and you know
one of the most important frankly is
russia and that's why the russian empire
ends up shaped in the way it
is the bizarre borders of that russia
still has to this day
um you know it's it's not the case
that europe is ignoring the ottoman
empire
while going and looting and pillaging
and enslaving people
on the rest of the planet right europe
is losing
to the ottoman empire all right and the
reason why
uh cities in italy become less and less
economically significant
is in part that they indeed are building
gunships
to try to keep away pirates and looters
and raiders
they're in a state of of constant war
and not even cold war
with the surrounding uh islamic empires
that rule a large part of the the
mediterranean around them
parts of the mediterranean that were in
the ancient hellenistic world
in the western roman empire eastern
europe that were very much part of
europe
and no longer are right so it's very
easy to misrepresent this
as a period of uh imperial
expansion right when you keep the map
centered on the same part of the world
that the roman empire
occupied eastern roman empire and
western
it continues to be contraction it
continues to be failure continues to be
collapsed right and it's both both
are true so europe is changing and
europe is going out and changing
the whole world but in some ways you
know
europeans going out and massacring
people
in australia in indonesia
in india in sri lanka i mean it's it's
mind-boggling how
almost every almost every corner of the
world
faces some kind of pressure or invasion
from europeans if not outright
enslavement genocide so it's a different
story in each case
but nevertheless and yet all of this
can be considered in the context of the
frustrated ambition just to reconquer
jerusalem right
there was a time when the crusades
really did matter
to all of the kings and popes in europe
and
that was the definition of what it was
to be european was to contribute your
soldiers
to the attempt that failed every time to
reconquer what they considered the holy
land to re-include in europe
you know jerusalem itself if not the
area we
think of as israel and palestine you
know etc they never did it
they never succeeded they never won that
right so you can call it a renaissance
and you can call it the golden age of
european imperialism something
imperialism but there's a very very
strange
like self-selected blindness to the ways
in which during that that
period europe is much weaker than it
wants to be in which it's losing
on a really important front that's right
there in the center of europe
greece was not the periphery of europe
it was
the center you can't think of this as
something far distant from england
england really was the periphery england
was a place of absolutely no
importance say in the year 1500 and
certainly in the year 1000
right it was of no significance at all
it becomes significant rapidly at the
very end of this this period time
at the end of the renaissance if you
like or even even later depending on
when you when you consider to be
the end of the renaissance okay now
um i had a spontaneous conversation
on a live stream talking about this
marxism can be refuted when it presents
itself
overtly and sincerely as marxism if
someone says to you
that they believe revolutions happen if
and only if the people are so poor and
so oppressed that they have to rise up
and
tear down the government right and they
believe this because they read it on a
certain page of the works of
karl marx or ingles now if someone says
that to you
you can at least criticize it you can
express your grounds for doubt you can
cross-examine them
you can demolish it what's much harder
to do
is to address these beliefs when the
people who believe them
aren't even aware of them right
they think of revolution
um like shaking up
a carbonated beverage and then it
explodes
right as if it's the oppression itself
it's the repression
it's the poverty that causes this
explosion
all right and there's no sensitivity to
there's no curiosity for the historical
reality that
what we call revolution and what we call
renaissance and what we call
enlightenment
really needs to be appreciated as
innovation
right innovation isn't caused by poverty
it's not caused by wealth either right
the island of corsica was a place of
absolutely no
significance when pasquale paoli led his
revolution there and went as it happened
a bunch of
intellectuals mostly british some french
decided to write about this and
describe it in terms of return to the
democracy and classical values of
ancient athens and rome and so on and
this became this
massively influential thing um
you know it became important because
there were
new ideas about how we could lead a
better life
the french revolution fundamentally was
created
just by the necessity of tax reform
at the beginning the revolutionary
period aristocrats didn't pay taxes
by the end of the revolutionary period
they did that was the fundamental
problem was that
aristocrats were tax exempt and
otherwise in many ways they had a
fantastically successful society it
wasn't caused by
poverty would have they could have just
had a tax reform
and trundled on through history without
any other changes right
people had new ideas right people wanted
to innovate
people wanted to achieve a better life
for themselves as individuals
and for themselves collectively you know
as a society
i answered the question i was asked in
an interview a few weeks ago
what is politics with the answer when we
talk about ethics
we talk about ethical philosophy we're
talking about the question of
how can i lead a good life and when we
talk about politics
we're talking with the question of how
can we lead a good life
revolutions happen
when people have fundamentally new ideas
about how we can have a better life
and when they're willing when they're
willing
to take terrible risks and pay a
terrible price
to try to make that happen